`plugin` added OpenTelemetry plugin and example (#1092)
DAGWorks-Inc/hamilton: examples/LLM_Workflows/observability_openllmetry/README.md

# Monitor Hamilton with OpenTelemetry, OpenLLMetry and Traceloop

> In this simple example, you'll learn how to use `OpenTelemetryTracer` to trace your Hamilton code, in particular LLM applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this simple example, you'll learn how to use the `OpenTelemetryTracer` to emit traces of your Hamilton code using the OpenTelemetry format, in particular LLM applications.
```

![Traceloop screenshot](image.png)

> [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) is an open-source cross-language tool that allows to instrument, generate, collect, and export telemetry data (metrics, logs, traces). When building applications and data platforms with several components, OpenTelemetry helps you centralize information about your system allowing you to monitor performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) is an open-source cross-language tool that allows to instrument, generate, collect, and export telemetry data (metrics, logs, traces) in an industry recognized standard way. 
```

One thing to note, OpenTelemetry is a middleware; it doesn't provide a destination to store data nor a dashboard. For the purpose of this example, we'll use the tool [Traceloop](https://www.traceloop.com/) which has a generous free-tier and is built by the developers of OpenLLMetry.

## Set up
Having access to a [Traceloop account](https://www.traceloop.com/) and an API key is a pre-requisite. The example can also be adapted to suit other [OpenTelemetry-compatible destinations](https://opentelemetry.io/ecosystem/vendors/).

1. Create a virtual environment and activate it
    ```bash
    python -m venv venv && . venv/bin/active
    ```

2. Install requirements.
    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```

3. Set environment variables for your API keys `OPENAI_API_KEY` and `TRACELOOP_API_KEY`

4. Execute the code
    ```bash
    python run.py
    ```

5. Explore results on Traceloop (or your OpenTelemetry destination).

> ## How does it compare to the Hamilton UI
> 
> On one hand, OpenTelemetry collects lightweight metadata about dataflow and node executions. It provides a central location for traces when your system has multiple componentes (e.g., server, client, cache, database). On the other hand, the Hamilton UI is tailored to Hamilton and provides visualizations, data lineage, summary statistics, and more utilities to improve your development experience. Given these systems emit lightweight metadata, it's totally reasonable to use both!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Should I still use the Hamilton UI?

Short answer is Yes! OpenTelemetry's roots are to collect "telemetry" on the internals of code and external API calls. It is a standard and is most commonly used inside web-services. There isn't any conflict with OpenTelemetry and what is captured in the Hamilton UI. In fact, the Hamilton UI captures a superset of what's possible with OpenTelemetry, and is of course tailored to Hamilton to provide visualizations, data lineage, summary statistics, and more utilities to improve your development experience. 
```

## Set up
Having access to a [Traceloop account](https://www.traceloop.com/) and an API key is a pre-requisite.

1. Create a virtual environment and activate it
    ```bash
    python -m venv venv && . venv/bin/active
    ```

2. Install requirements.
    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```

3. Set environment variables for your API keys `OPENAI_API_KEY` and `TRACELOOP_API_KEY`

4. Execute the code
    ```bash
    python run.py
    ```

5. Explore results on Traceloop (or your OpenTelemetry destination).

### Without Traceloop

For this example to work without Traceloop, you will need to set up your own [OpenTelemetry destination](https://opentelemetry.io/ecosystem/vendors/). We suggest using [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.47/getting-started/) and included Python code to route telemetry to it in `run.py`.

## Should I still use the Hamilton UI?

> Absolutely! OpenTelemetry focsues on collecting telemetry about the interals of code and external API calls. It's a standard amongst web services. There's no conflict between the OpenTelemetry tracer and the tracking for the Hamilton UI. In fact, the Hamilton UI captures a superset of what OpenTelemetry allows, tailored to the Hamilton framework such as:  visualizations, data lineage, summary statistics, and more utilities to improve your development experience. In the not too distant future, the Hamilton UI could ingest OpenTelemetry data 😉 (contributions welcomed!)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Absolutely! OpenTelemetry focsues on collecting telemetry about the internals of code and external API calls. It's a standard amongst web services. There's no conflict between the OpenTelemetry tracer and the tracking for the Hamilton UI. In fact, the Hamilton UI captures a superset of what OpenTelemetry allows, tailored to the Hamilton framework such as:  visualizations, data lineage, summary statistics, and more utilities to improve your development experience. In the not too distant future, the Hamilton UI could ingest OpenTelemetry data 😉 (contributions welcomed!)
```
